Section 4. Application for Membership. An applicant for membership shall
file a duly accomplished form to the Board of Directors who shall act upon
the application within Thirty (30) days from the date of filing. The Board of
Directors shall devise a form for the purpose which shall, aside from the
personal data of applicant, include the duties of a member to participate in
all programs including but not limited to capital build-up and savings
mobilization of the cooperative and, such other information as may be
deemed necessary.
The application form for membership shall include an undertaking
to uphold the By-laws, policies, guidelines, rules and regulations
promulgated by the Board of Directors and the general assembly. No
application for membership shall be given due course if not accompanied
with a membership fee of Five Hundred Pesos (Php 500.00), which shall be
refunded to the applicant in case of rejection.
Section 5. Appeal. An applicant whose application was denied by the Board
of Directors may appeal to the General Assembly and the latter’s decision
shall be final. For this purpose, the General Assembly may opt to create an
appeal and Grievance Committee/Membership Committee. The Appeal and
Grievance Committee/ Membership Committee shall decide appeals on
membership application within thirty (30) days upon receipt thereof.
Section 6. Minimum Share Capital Requirement. An applicant for regular
membership shall subscribe at least forty (40) shares and pay the value of
at least ten (10) shares upon approval of his/her membership.
However, no member shall own or hold more than ten percent (10%)
of the total subscribed share capital of the Cooperative.
Section 7. Duties and Responsibilities of a Member. Every member shall have the
2
following duties:
a. Pay the installment of his/her share capital subscription as it falls
due and to participate in the capital build-up and savings
mobilization activities of the Cooperative;
b. Patronize the Cooperative’s business(es) and services;
c. Participate in the membership education programs and other
activities and affairs of the Cooperative;
d. Attend and participate in the deliberation of all matters taken during
General Assembly meetings;
e. Observe and obey all lawful orders, decisions, rules and regulations
adopted by the Board of Directors and the General Assembly;
Section 8. Rights and Privileges of Members. A member shall have the following
rights and privileges:
Regular Members
a. Attend general membership meetings;
b. Avail himself of the services of the Cooperative, subject to
certain conditions as may be prescribed by the Board of
Directors;
c. Inspect and examine the books of accounts, the audited
financial statements, the minutes books, the share register, and
other records of the Cooperative during reasonable office hours;
d. Secure copies of Cooperative records/documents pertaining to
the account information of the concerned member;
e. Participate in the continuing education and other training
programs of the Cooperative; and
f. Such other rights and privileges as may be granted by the
General Assembly.
Section 9. Members Entitled to Vote. Any regular member who meets the
following conditions is a member entitled to vote:
1. Paid the membership fee and the value of the minimum shares
required for membership;
3
2. Not delinquent in the payment of his/her share capital subscriptions
and other accounts or obligations;
3. Has completed the continuing education program prescribed by the
Board of Directors;
4. Has participated in the affairs of the Cooperative and patronized its
businesses in accordance with cooperative’s policies and guidelines;
Failure of the member to meet any of the above conditions shall
mean suspension of voting until the same have been lifted upon the
determination of the Board of Directors.
Consequently, a member entitled to vote shall have the following
additional rights:
a. Participate and vote on all matters deliberated upon during General
Assembly meetings;
b. Seek any elective or appointive position, subject to the provisions of
this By-laws and the Philippine Cooperative Code of 2008; and
c. Such other rights and privileges as may be provided by the General
Assembly.
Section 10. Liability of Members. A member shall be liable for the debts of the
Cooperative only to the extent of his/her subscribed share capital.
Section 11. Termination of Membership. Termination of membership may be
automatic, voluntary or involuntary, which shall have the effect of
extinguishing all rights of a member in the Cooperative, subject to refund
of share capital contributions under Section 13 hereof.
a. Automatic Termination of Membership. The death or insanity of a
member shall be considered an automatic termination of his/her
membership in the Cooperative: Provided, however, that in case of
death or insanity of a member of a Cooperative, the next-of-kin shall
assume the duties and responsibilities of the original member.
Failure of the associate member to meet the minimum requirement of
regular membership, to continue to patronize the products and
services of the Cooperative for two (2) years, and signify his/her
4
intention to become regular member shall automatically terminate
his/her membership.
b. Voluntary Termination. A member may, for any valid reason, withdraw
his/her membership from the Cooperative by giving a sixty (60) day
notice to the Board of Directors.
c. Involuntary Termination. A member may be terminated by a vote of the
majority of all the members of the Board of Directors for any of the
following causes:
i. Has not patronized the service(s)/business(es) of the Cooperative
as provided for in the policies of the cooperative;
ii. Has continuously failed to comply with his/her obligations as
provided for in the policies of the Cooperative;
iii. Has violated any provision of this By-laws and the policies of the
Cooperative; and
iv. For any act or omission injurious or prejudicial to the interest or
the welfare of the Cooperative, as defined by the General
Assembly.
Section 12. Manner of Involuntary Termination. The Board of Directors shall
notify in writing the member who is being considered for termination and
shall give him/her the opportunity to be heard.
The written decision of the board of directors shall be communicated
in person or by registered mail to said member and is appealable within
thirty (30) days from receipt thereof to the General Assembly or Appeal and
Grievance Committee/Membership Committee, as the case may be, whose
decision shall be final.
Section 13. Refund of Share Capital Contribution. A member whose membership
is terminated shall be entitled to a refund of his/her share capital
contribution and all other interests in the Cooperative. However, such
refund shall not be made if upon payment the value of the assets of the
Cooperative would be less than the aggregate amount of its debts and
liabilities exclusive of his/her share capital contribution. In which case,
the member shall continue to be entitled to the interest of his/her share
5
capital contributions, patronage refund and the use of the services of the
Cooperative until such time that all his/her interests in the Cooperative
shall have been duly paid.
