Article III
Administration
Section 1. The General Assembly (GA). The General Assembly is composed of
all the members entitled to vote, duly assembled and constituting a
quorum and is the highest policy-making body of the Cooperative.
Section 2. Powers of the General Assembly. Subject to the pertinent provisions
of the Cooperative Code and the rules issued thereunder, the General
Assembly shall have the following exclusive powers which cannot be
delegated:
a. To determine and approve amendments to the cooperative Articles of
Cooperation and By-laws;
b. To elect or appoint the members of the board of directors, and to
remove them for cause;
c. To approve developmental plans of the Cooperative;
Section 3. Meetings. Meetings of the General Assembly, may be regular or
special. All proceedings and business(es) undertaken at any meeting of the
General Assembly, if within the powers or authority of the Cooperative,
there being a quorum, shall be valid.
Regular and associate members are required to attend the meetings for the
purpose of exercising all the rights and performing all the obligations
pertaining to them, as provided by the Code, Articles of Cooperation and
ByLaws.
Section 4. Regular General Assembly Meeting. The General Assembly shall hold
its annual regular meeting every Every 2nd Saturday of March at the
principal office of the Cooperative or at any place as may be determined by
the Board.
6
Section 5. Special General Assembly Meeting. The Board of Directors may, by a
majority vote of all its members, call a Special General Assembly meeting
at any time to consider urgent matters requiring immediate membership
decision. The Board of Directors must likewise call a Special General
Assembly meeting within one (1) month from receipt of a written request
from:
a. at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of members entitled to
vote,
b. the Audit Committee; or
c. the Federation or Union to which the Cooperative is a member; or
d. upon Order of the Cooperative Development Authority;
Section 6. Notice of Meeting. All notices of meetings shall be in writing and
shall include the date, time, place, and agenda thereof stated therein.
a. Regular General Assembly Meeting. Notice of the annual Regular General
Assembly meeting shall be served by the Secretary, personally or
his/her duly authorized representative, by registered mail, or by
electronic means to all members of record at his/her last known
postal address, or by posting or publication, or through other
electronic means, at least one (1) week before the said meeting. It
shall be accompanied with an agenda, minutes of meeting of the last
General Assembly meeting, consolidated reports of the Board of
Directors and Committees, audited financial statements, and other
papers which may assist the members to intelligently participate in
the proceedings.
b. Special General Assembly Meeting. Notice of any Special General
Assembly meeting shall be served by the Secretary personally or
his/her duly authorized representative, by registered mail, or by
electronic means upon each members who are entitled to vote at
his/her last known postal address, or by posting or publication, or
through other electronic means, at least one (1) week before the said
meeting. It shall state the purpose and, except for related issues, no
other business shall be considered during the meeting.
7
c. Waiver of Notice. Notice of any meeting may be waived, expressly or
impliedly, by the member concerned.
Section 7. Order of Business. As far as practicable, the order of business of a
regular general assembly meeting shall be:
a. Call to order;
b. Proof of due notice;
c. Roll Call;
d. Reading, consideration and approval of the minutes of the previous
meeting;
e. Presentation and approval of the reports of the board of directors,
officers, and the committees, including audited financial statements
of the Cooperative Annual Progress Report and all other required
reports;
f. Unfinished business;
g. New business;
i. Election of directors and committee members
ii. Approval of Development and/or annual Plan and Budget;
iii. Hiring of External Auditor
iv. Other related business matters
h. Announcements; and
i. Adjournment
Section 8. Quorum for General Assembly Meeting. During regular or special
general assembly meeting, at least sixty percent (60%) of the total number
of members entitled to vote shall constitute a quorum.
Section 9. Voting System. Only members entitled to vote shall be qualified to
participate and vote in any General Assembly meeting. A member is
entitled to one vote only regardless of the number of shares he/she owns.
8
Election or removal of Directors and Committee members shall be by
secret ballot. Action on all matters shall be in any manner that will truly
and correctly reflect the will of the membership. No proxy and/or
cumulative voting shall be allowed.
