Article IV
Board of Directors
Section 1. Composition of the Board of Directors (BOD). The Board of Directors
shall be composed of five (5) members.
Section 2. Functions and Responsibilities. The Board of Directors shall have the
following functions and responsibilities:
a. Provide over-all policy direction;
b. Formulate development plan;
c. Review the annual plan and budget and recommend for the approval
of the General/Representative Assembly;
d. Evaluate the capability and qualification and recommend for the
approval of the General/Representative Assembly the engagements of
the services of an External Auditor;
e. Appoint and terminate, based on just cause, the General Manager or
Chief Executive Officer (CEO);;
f. Review, monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the programs,
projects and activities;
g. Formulate and review the vision, mission and goals of the Cooperative;
h. Establish risk management system;
i. Establish performance evaluation system at all levels;
j. Review and approve the organizational and operational structures;
k. Establish policies and procedures for the effective operation and
ensure proper implementation of such;
l. Appoint the members of the Mediation and Conciliation Committee,
Ethics Committee, Education and Training Committee and other
Officers as specified in the Code and By-laws of the Cooperative;
m. Decide election-related cases involving the Election Committee and its
9
members;
n. Act on the recommendation of the Ethics Committee on cases
involving violations of the Code of Governance and Ethical Standards;
o. Ensure compliance by the Cooperative with the regulations of the
Authority and other statutory requirements of appropriate
government agencies;
p. Report to the General/Representative Assembly the performance and
achievements of the Cooperative;
q. Present to the General/Representative Assembly policies which
require confirmation as provided under the law, the Cooperative By-
laws, and regulations;
r. Present to the General/Representative Assembly the financial, social
and performance reports; and
s. Perform such other functions as may be authorized by the
General/Representative Assembly.
Section 3. Qualifications. Any member who is entitled to vote and has the
following qualifications can be elected or continue as member of the Board
of Directors:
a. Has paid the minimum capital requirement;
b. Has no delinquent account with the Cooperative;
c. Have continuously patronized the Cooperative’s services;
d. A member in good standing for the last two (2) years;
e. Completed or willingness to complete within the prescribed period the
required education and training whichever is applicable; and
f. Other qualifications prescribed in the rules and regulations of the
Authority.
Section 4. Disqualifications. Any member who is under any of the following
circumstances shall be disqualified to be elected as a member of the Board
of Directors, or to continue as such:
a. Holding any elective position in the government, except that of a party
list representative being an officer of a Cooperative he/she represents;
b. Members holding any other position directly involved in the day-to-
day operation and management of the Cooperative;
c. Having direct or indirect personal interest with the business of the
Cooperative;
d. Having been absent for five(5) consecutive meetings or in more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of all meetings within the twelve (12) month
period unless with valid excuse as approved by the Board of Directors;
e. Being an official or employee of the Cooperative Development
Authority, except in a Cooperative organized among themselves;
f. Having been convicted by final judgement in administrative
proceedings or civil/criminal suits involving financial and/or property
accountability; and
g. Having been disqualified by law.
Section 5. Procedure for Disqualifications. The procedure for disqualification
shall be provided in the election guidelines or policy of the Cooperative.
Section 6. Election of Directors. The members of the Board of Directors shall
be elected by secret ballot by members entitled to vote during the annual
Regular General Assembly meeting or Special General Assembly meeting
called for the purpose. Unless earlier removed for cause, or have resigned
or become incapacitated, they shall hold office for a term of two (2) years or
until their successors shall have been elected and qualified; Provided, that
majority of the elected directors obtaining the highest number of votes
during the first election after registration shall serve for two (2) years, and
the remaining directors for one (1) year. Thereafter, all directors shall serve
for a term of two (2) years. The term of the cooperators-directors shall
expire upon the election of their successors in the first Regular General
Assembly after registration.
Section 7. Election of Officer within the Board of Directors. The Board of
Directors shall convene within ten (10) days after the General Assembly
meeting to elect by secret ballot from among themselves the Chairperson
and the ViceChairperson, and to elect or appoint the Secretary and
Treasurer from outside of the Board.
For committees elected by the General Assembly and/or appointed
11
by the Board of Directors, procedural process of electing the Chairperson,
ViceChairperson or other positions among themselves should be in
accordance with the process mentioned above.
Section 8. Meeting of the Board of Directors.The regular meeting of the Board of
Directors shall be held at least once a month. However, the Chairperson or
majority of the directors may at any time call a Special Board meeting to
consider urgent matters. The call shall be addressed and delivered through
the Secretary stating the date, time and place of such meeting and the
matters to be considered. Notice of special meetings of the Board of
Directors, shall be served by the Secretary in writing or through electronic
means to each director at least one (1) week before such meeting.
Majority of the total number of Directors constitutes a quorum to
transact business. Any decision or action taken by the majority members
of the Board of Directors in a meeting duly assembled shall be a valid
cooperative act.
Section 9. Vacancies. Any vacancy occurring in the Board of Directors by
reason of death, incapacity, removal or resignation may be filled-up within
thirty (30) days by a majority vote of the remaining directors, if still
constituting a quorum; otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled by the
General Assembly in a regular or special meeting called for the purpose.
The elected director shall serve only for the unexpired term of his/her
predecessor in office.
In the event that the General Assembly failed to muster a quorum to
fill the positions vacated by directors whose term have expired and said
directors refuse to continue their functions on a hold-over capacity, the
remaining members of the Board together with the members of the Audit
Committee shall designate, from the qualified regular members of the
General Assembly, their replacements who shall serve temporarily as such
until their successors shall have been elected and qualified in a regular or
special General Assembly meeting called for the purpose.
If a vacancy occurs in any elective committee it shall be filled by the
12
remaining members of the said committee, if still constituting a quorum,
otherwise, the Board, in its discretion, may appoint or hold a special
election to fill such vacancy.
