Article V
Committees
Section 1. Audit Committee. An Audit Committee shall be composed of three
(3) members to be elected during a General Assembly meeting and shall
hold office for a term of one (1) year or until their successors shall have
been elected and qualified. Within ten (10) days after their election, they
shall elect from among themselves a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and a
Secretary. No member of the committee shall hold any other position
within the Cooperative during his/her term of office. The Committee shall
provide internal audit service, maintain a complete record of its
examination and inventory, and submit an audit report quarterly or as
may be required by the Board and the General Assembly.
The Audit Committee shall be directly accountable and responsible
to the General Assembly.
Section 2. Functions and Responsibilities. The Audit Committee shall:
a. Audit the performance of the Cooperative and its various
responsibility centers;
b. Monitor the adequacy and effectiveness of the Cooperative’s
management and control system;
c. Review continuously and periodically the books of account, financial
records, and policies governing internal control, accounting and risk
management to ensure that these are in accordance with the
Cooperative principles and generally accepted accounting procedures;
d. Review the internal audit report of the Cooperative;
e. Follow up actions on the internal and external audit
recommendations;
f. Discuss the result of the internal audit with the Board of Directors;
g. Submit reports on the result of the internal audit and recommend
14
necessary changes on policies and other related matters on operation
to the General/Representative Assembly;
h. Review, approve or amend the report and recommendation of the
Ethics Committee involving violations of the Code of Governance and
Ethical Standards if the remaining members of the Board of Directors
fail to act on said report and recommendation within a period of
thirty (30) days, or the violation is committed by the majority of the
Board of Directors; and
i. Perform such other functions as may be prescribed in the By-laws or
authorized by the General/Representative Assembly.
Section 3. Election Committee.An Election Committee shall be composed of
three (3) members to be elected during a General Assembly meeting and
shall hold office for a term of one (1) year or until their successors shall
have been elected and qualified. Within ten (10) days after their election
they shall elect from among themselves a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and a Secretary. No member of the committee shall hold any other position
within the Cooperative during his/her term of office.
Section 4. Functions and Responsibilities. The Election Committee shall:
a. Formulate election rules and guidelines and recommend to the
General/Representative Assembly for approval;
b. Recommend necessary amendments to the election rules and
guidelines, in coordination with the Board of Directors, for the
General/Representatives Assembly's approval;
c. Implement election rules and guidelines duly approved by the
General/Representative Assembly;
d. Supervise the conduct, manner and procedure of election and other
election related activities and act on the changes thereto
e. Canvass and certify the results of the election;
f. Proclaim the winning candidates;
g. Decide election and other election-related cases except those
involving the Election Committee or its members; and
h. Perform such other functions as prescribed in the By-laws or
15
authorized by the General/Representative Assembly.
Section 5. Education and Training Committee. An Education and Training
Committee shall be composed of three (3) members to be appointed by the
Board of Directors and shall serve for a term of one (1) year, without
prejudice to their reappointment. Within ten (10) days after their
appointment, they shall elect from among themselves a Vice-Chairperson
and a Secretary. The ViceChairperson of the Board of Directors shall act as
the Chairperson of the Committee.
The committee shall be responsible for the planning and
implementation of the information, educational and human resource
development programs of the Cooperative for its members, officers and the
communities within its area of operation.
Section 6. Functions and Responsibilities. The Education and Training
Committee shall:
a. Keep members, officers, staff well-informed regarding Cooperative’s
goals/objectives, policies & procedures, services, etc.;
b. Plan and implement educational program for coop members, officers
and staff;
c. Develop promotional and training materials for the Cooperative; and
d. Conduct/Coordinate training activities.
Section 7. Mediation and Conciliation Committee. A Mediation and Conciliation
Committee shall be composed of three (3) members to be appointed by the
Board of Directors. Within ten (10) days after their appointment, they shall
elect from among themselves a Chairperson, ViceChairperson and a
Secretary who shall serve for a term of one (1) year or until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified and without prejudice
to their reappointment. No member of the Committee shall hold any other
position in the Cooperative during his/her term of office.
Section 8. Functions and Responsibilities. The Mediation and Conciliation
Committee shall:
16
a. Conduct mediation-conciliation proceedings and services;
b. Formulate, develop and improve the Conciliation-Mediation policies,
guidelines and program and ensure its proper implementation;
c. Monitor Conciliation-Mediation program and processes;
d. Submit semi-annual reports of cooperative cases to the Authority
within fifteen (15) days after the end of every semester;
e. Accept and file Evaluation Reports;
f. Submit recommendations for improvements to the BOD;
g. Recommend to the BOD any member of the Cooperative for
Conciliation-Mediation Training as Cooperative Mediator-Conciliator;
h. Issue the Certificate of Non-Settlement (CNS);
i. Act as conciliator-mediator during their term, provided the persons
who will mediate are mutually selected by both parties; and
j. Perform such other functions as may be prescribed in the By-laws or
authorized by the Board of Directors.
Section 9. Ethics Committee. An Ethics Committee shall be composed of three
(3) members to be appointed by the Board of Directors. Within ten (10)
days after their appointment, they shall elect from among themselves a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary who shall serve for a term
of one (1) year or until their successors shall have been appointed and
qualified and without prejudice to their reappointment. No member of the
Committee shall hold any other position in the Cooperative during his/her
term of office.
Section 10. Functions and Responsibilities. The Ethics Committee shall:
a. Formulate, develop, implement and monitor the Code of Governance
and Ethical Standards (CGES) to be observed by the members,
officers and employees of the cooperative subject to the approval of
the Board of Directors and ratification by the General/Representative
Assembly;
b. Conduct initial investigation or inquiry, upon receipt of a complaint
involving violations of the Code of Governance and Ethical Standards;
c. Submit report on its recommendation together with the appropriate
17
sanctions, to the Board of Directors for its proper action, or to the
remaining members of the Board of Directors, if the violation is
committed by any member of the Board of Directors. Provided, that if
the remaining members of the Board of Directors fail to act on the
report within a period of thirty (30) days, or the violation is committed
by the majority of the Board of Directors, the Audit committee shall
act on the same; and
d. Perform such other functions as may be prescribed in the By-laws or
authorized by the Board of Directors.
Section 11. Gender and Development (GAD) Committee. A Gender and
Development (GAD) Committee shall be composed of three ( 3) members to
be appointed by the Board of Directors provided that at least one member
shall come from the Board. The Committee shall elect from among
themselves a Chairperson. The Committee members shall hold office until
replaced by the Board.
Section 12. Functions and Responsibilities. The Gender and Development
(GAD) Committee shall:
a. Conduct gender analysis;
b. Develop and recommend Gender and Development ( GAD )and
Gender Equality (GE )policies and programs/activities/projects to the
Board;
c. Monitor and assess progress in the implementation of Gender and
Development (GAD) programs/activities/projects towards achieving
Gender Equality (GE );
d. Submit report to the Board; and
e. Provide directional guidance.
Section 13. GAD Focal Person. A GAD Focal Person (GFP) shall be designated
by the Board upon recommendation of the management. He or she must
be an employee of the cooperative and shall perform GFP roles as
additional function
18
Section 14. Functions and Responsibilities of GAD Focal Person (GFP).
a. Coordinates and reviews implementation of GAD
programs/activities/projects based on approved plans and budget;
b. Prepares performance reports and recommends policy improvements
to the GAD Committee;
c. Gathers and analyzes gender-related information and other data; and
d. Provides administrative services to the GAD Committee.
Section 15. GAD Education and Training Program. The Cooperative shall
identify GAD and GE-related education and training programs. These shall
be included in the annual education and training plan.
Section 16. GAD Support Systems and Services. The Cooperative shall
implement other services that address GAD and GE issues and concerns.
It shall also develop and establish necessary support systems that will
enhance implementation of the GAD and GE services of the Cooperative
Section 16. Others Committee. By a majority vote of all its members, the
Board of Directors may form such other committees as may be deemed
necessary for the operation of the Cooperative.
Section 17. Qualification and Disqualification of Committee Members. The
qualification and disqualification of the Board of Directors shall also apply
to all the members of the committees
