Article VI
Officers and Management Staff of the Cooperative
Section 1. Officers and their Duties. The officers of the cooperative shall
include the Members of the Board of Directors, Members of the Different
Committees, General Manager/Chief Executive Officer, Secretary and
Treasurer who shall serve according to the functions and responsibilities of
their respective offices as follows:
a. Chairperson – The Chairperson shall:
i. Set and prepare the agenda for board meetings in coordination
19
with the other members of the Board of Directors;
ii. Preside all meetings of the Board of Directors and
General/Representative Assembly;
iii. Sign contracts, agreements, certificates and other documents on
behalf of the Cooperative as authorized by the Board of Directors
or by the General/Representative Assembly as prescribed in
their By-laws; and
iv. Perform such other functions as may be authorized by the Board
of Directors.
b. Vice-Chairperson –the Vice-Chairperson shall:
i. Perform all the duties and responsibilities of the Chairperson in
the absence of the latter;
ii. Perform such other duties as may be delegated by the board of
directors.
c. Treasurer – The Treasurer shall:
i. Ensure that all cash collections are deposited in accordance
with the policies set by the Board of Directors;
ii. Have custody of funds, securities, and documentations relating
to assets, liabilities, income and expenditures;
iii. Monitor and review the financial management operations of the
Cooperative, subject to such limitations and control as may be
prescribed by the Board of Directors;
iv. Ensure the maintenance of full and complete records of cash
transactions;
v. Ensure maintenance of a Petty Cash Fund;
vi. Maintain a Daily Cash Position Report; and
vii. Perform such other functions as may be prescribed in the By-
laws or authorized by the Board of Directors.
d. Secretary – The Secretary shall:
i. Keep an updated and complete registry of all members
ii. Record, prepare and maintain records of all minutes of meetings
of the Board of Directors and the General/Representative
Assembly;
iii. Ensure that the necessary actions and decisions of the Board of
Directors are transmitted to the management for compliance
and implementation;
iv. Issue and certify the list of members who are entitled to vote as
determined by the Board of Directors;
v. Prepare and issue Share Certificates and maintain the share and
transfer book;
vi. Serve notice of all meetings called and certify the presence of
quorum in the conduct of all meetings of the Board of Directors
and the General/Representative Assembly;
vii. Keep copies of the Treasurer's reports and other reports;
viii. Serve as custodian of the Cooperative seal; and
ix. Perform such other functions as may be prescribed be delegated
by the board of directors.and/or by the GA.
e. General Manager. The General Manager shall:
i. Oversee the overall day to day business operations of the
Cooperative by providing direction, supervision, management
and administrative control over all the operating departments
subject to such limitations as may be set forth by the Board of
Directors or the General/Representative Assembly;
ii. Assist the Board of Directors in the formulation of the
Cooperative's Development Plan including Annual Plan and
Budget, Programs and Projects, for approval of the
General/Representative Assembly;
iii. Provide systems and procedures in the implementation of
policies;
iv. Implement the duly approved plans and programs of the
Cooperative and any other directive or instruction of the Board
of Directors;
v. Provide and submit to the Board of Directors monthly reports on
the status of the Cooperative's operation vis-a-vis its targets and
recommend appropriate policy or operational changes, if
necessary;
vi. Represent the Cooperative in any agreement, contract, business
dealing, and in any other official business transaction as may be
authorized by the Board of Directors;
vii. Ensure compliance with all administrative and other
requirements of regulatory bodies; and
viii. Perform such other functions as may be prescribed in the By-
laws delegated by the Board of Directors or authorized by the
General/Representative Assembly
Section 2. Liabilities of Directors, Officers and Committee Members. Directors,
officers and committee members, who willfully and knowingly vote for or
assent to patently unlawful acts, or who are guilty of gross negligence or
bad faith in directing the affairs of the Cooperative or acquire any personal
or pecuniary interest in conflict with their duties as Directors, officers or
committee members shall be liable jointly and severally for all damages
resulting therefrom to the Cooperative, members and other persons.
When a director, officer or committee member attempts to acquire,
or acquires in violation of his/her duties, any interest or equity adverse to
the Cooperative in respect to any matter which has been reposed in
him/her in confidence, he/she shall, as a trustee for the Cooperative, be
liable for damages or loss of profits which otherwise would have accrued to
the Cooperative.
Section 3. Management Staff. The core management team of the Cooperative
composed of manager, cashier, bookkeeper, accountant, and other
position as provided for in the Human Resource Manual shall take charge
of the day-today operations of the Cooperative. The Board of Directors
shall appoint, fix their compensation and prescribe for the functions and
responsibilities.
Section 4. Qualification of the General Manager. No person shall be appointed
to the position of general manager unless he/she possesses the following
qualifications and none of the disqualifications herein enumerated:
a. Must be familiar with the operation of the Cooperative;
b. Must have at least two (2) years experience in the operations of or
related activities;
22
c. Must not be engaged directly or indirectly in any activity similar to
the operation of the Cooperative;
d. Must be of good moral character;
e. Must not have been convicted of any administrative, civil or criminal
cases involving moral turpitude, gross negligence or grave misconduct
in the performance of his/her duties;
f. Must not have been convicted of any administrative, civil or criminal
case involving financial and/or property accountabilities at the time
of his/her appointment; and
g. Must undergo pre-service and/or in-service trainings.
Section 5. Duties of the Cashier. The Cashier of the Cooperative, who shall be
under supervision and control of the General Manager shall:
a. Handle monetary transactions;
b. Receive/collect payments and deposits;
c. Be responsible for money received and expended;
d. Prepare reports on money matters; and
e. Perform such other duties as the Board of Directors may require.
Section 6. Duties of the Accountant. The Accountant of the Cooperative, who
shall be under supervision and control of the General Manager shall:
a. Install an adequate and effective accounting system within the
Cooperative;
b. Render reports on the financial condition and operations of the
Cooperative monthly, annually or as may be required by the Board of
Directors and/or the General Assembly;
c. Provide assistance to the Board of Directors in the preparation of
annual budget;
d. Keep, maintain and preserve all books of accounts, documents,
vouchers, contracts and other records concerning the business of the
Cooperative and make them available for auditing purposes to the
Chairperson of the Audit Committee; and
e. Perform such other duties as the Board of Directors may require.
23
Section 7. Duties of the Bookkeeper. The bookkeeper of the Cooperative who is
under supervision and control of the Accountant shall:
a. Records and update books of accounts;
b. Provide assistance in the preparation of reports on the financial
condition and operations of the Cooperative monthly, annually or as
may be required by the Board of Directors and/or the General
Assembly;
c. Keep, maintain and preserve all books of accounts, documents,
vouchers, contracts and other records concerning the business of the
Cooperative and make them available for auditing purposes to the
Chairperson of the Audit Committee; and
d. Perform such other duties as the Board of Directors may require.
Section 8. Qualifications of Accountant, Cashier, and Bookkeeper.No person shall
be appointed to the position of accountant and bookkeeper unless they
possess the following qualifications and none of the disqualifications
herein enumerated:
a. Bachelors degree in accountancy must be required for Accountant
however Cashier and Bookkeeper must be knowledgeable in handling
monetary transactions, accounting and bookkeeping;
b. Must have at least two (2) years experience in Cooperative operation
or related business;
c. Must not be engaged directly or indirectly in any activity similar to
the business of the Cooperative;
d. Must not be convicted of any administrative, civil or criminal case
involving moral turpitude, gross negligence or grave misconduct in
the performance of his/her duties;
e. Must be of good moral character;
f. Must be willing to undergo pre-service and/or in-service trainings in
accounting; and
g. Must not have been convicted of any administrative, civil or criminal
case involving financial and/or property accountabilities at the time
of his/her appointment.
24
Section 9. Compensation.Subject to the approval of the General Assembly,
the members of the Board of Directors and Committees may, in addition to
per diems for actual attendance to board and committee meetings, and
reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses while performing
functions in behalf of the Cooperative, be given regular compensation;
Provided, further, that the directors and officers shall not be entitled to
any per diem when, if in the preceding calendar year, the Cooperative
reported a net loss or had a dividend rate less than the official inflation
rate for the same year.
Article VII
Capital Structure
Section 1. Source of Funds. The Cooperative may derive its funds from any or
all of the following sources:
a. Members’ share capital contribution;
b. Loans and borrowings including deposits;
c. Revolving capital build-up which consist of the deferred payment of
patronage refund or interest on share capital;
d. Subsidies, grants, legacies, aids, donation, awards and winnings and
such other assistance from any local or foreign institution, public or
private;
e. Retentions from the proceeds of services acquired /goods procured by
members; and
f. Other sources of funds as may be authorized by law.
Section 2. Continuous Capital Build-Up. Every member shall have invested in
any or all of the following:
a. At least One Hundred Pesos (P100)per month;
b. At least Twenty-five percent (25%) of his/her annual interest on
capital and patronage refund; and
c. At least Twenty-five percent (25%) of each good procured /service
acquired from the cooperative.
25
Section 3. Borrowing. The Board of Directors, upon approval of the General
Assembly, may borrow funds from any source, local or foreign, under such
terms and conditions that best serve the interest of the Cooperative.
Section 4. Revolving Capital. To strengthen the capital structure of the
Cooperative, the General Assembly may authorize the Board of Directors to
raise a revolving capital by deferring the payment of patronage refunds and
interest on share capital, or such other schemes as may be legally
adopted. To implement this provision, the Board of Directors shall issue a
Revolving Capital Certificate with serial number, name, rate of interest,
date of retirement and such other privileges or restrictions as may be
deemed just and equitable
Section 5. Share Capital Contribution.Share Capital Contribution refers to the
value of the paid subscription by a member in accordance with its Articles
of Cooperation.
Section 6. Share Capital Certificate. The Board of Directors shall issue a Share
Capital Certificate only to a member who has fully paid his/her
subscription. The Certificate shall be serially numbered and contain the
shareholder’s name, the number of shares owned, the par value, and duly
signed by the Chairperson and the Secretary, and bearing the official seal
of the cooperative. All certificates issued and/or transferred shall be
registered in the cooperative’s Share and Transfer Book.
The number of paid share required for the issuance of Share Capital
Certificate shall be determined by the Board of Directors.
The shares may be purchased, owned or held only by persons who
are eligible for membership. Subject to existing government rules or laws,
interests shall be paid only to paid-up shares which may be in cash; or
credited as payment of unpaid subscriptions, outstanding accounts, or
additional shares or to the revolving fund of the cooperative.
Section 7. Assignment of Share Capital Contribution or Interest. Subject to the
provisions of the Code, no member shall transfer his/her shares or interest
in the cooperative or any part thereof unless:
26
a. He/she has held such share capital contribution or interest for not
less than one (1) year;
b. The assignment is made to the cooperative or to a person who falls
within the field of membership of the Cooperative; and
c. The Board of Directors has approved such assignment.
The assignment of shares shall not be binding to the Cooperative
until such transfer has been registered in the share and transfer book. No
transfer shall be completed until the old certificate has been endorsed and
surrendered to the Cooperative and a new certificate is issued in the name
of the membertransferee. The corresponding transfer fee shall be collected
from the transferee as prescribed in the Cooperative policy.
In case of lost or destroyed share certificate, the Board of Directors
may issue a replacement after the owner thereof executes a sworn
affidavit, setting forth the following:
a. Circumstances as to how, when and where said certificate was lost or
destroyed;
b. The serial number of the certificate; and the number of shares it
represents;
c. The lost or destroyed certificate has never been transferred, sold or
endorsed to any third party, provided, that should the same be found,
the owner shall surrender it to the Cooperative; and
d. That any false representation or statement made in the aforesaid
affidavit shall be a ground for expulsion from the Cooperative
Article VIII
Allocation and Distribution of Net Surplus
Section 1. Allocation. At the end of its calendar year, the Cooperative shall
allocate and distribute its net surplus as follows:
a. Reserve Fund. Ten percent (10%) shall be set aside for Reserve Fund.
Provided, that in the first five (5) years of operation after registration,
this amount shall not be less than fifty percent (50%) of the net
27
surplus. The reserve fund shall be subjected to the following rules:
i. The reserve fund shall be used for the stability of the
Cooperative and to meet net losses in its operations. The
General Assembly may decrease the amount allocated to the
reserve fund when it has already exceeded the authorized share
capital. Any sum recovered on items previously charged to the
reserve fund shall be credited to such fund.
ii. The reserve fund shall not be utilized for investment, other than
those allowed in the Cooperative Code. Such sum of the reserve
fund in excess of the authorized share capital may be used at
any time for any project that would expand the operations of the
Cooperative upon the resolution of the General Assembly.
iii. Upon the dissolution of the Cooperative, the reserve fund shall
not be distributed among the members. However, the General
Assembly may resolve:
a. To establish a usufructuary trust fund for the benefit of
any federation or union to which the Cooperative is
affiliated; or
b. To donate, contribute or otherwise dispose of the amount
for the benefit of the community where the Cooperative
operates. If the member could not decide on the disposition
of the reserve fund, the same shall be given to the
federation or union to which the Cooperative is affiliated
b. Education and Training Fund. Ten percent (10%) shall be set aside for
Education and Training Fund.
i. Half of the amount allocated to the education and training fund
annually under this subsection may be spent by the cooperative
for education and training purposes; while the other half may be
remitted to a union or federation chosen by the Cooperative or of
which it is a member
ii. Upon the dissolution of the cooperative, the unexpended balance
of the education and training fund pertaining to the Cooperative
shall be credited to the Cooperative education and training fund
of the chosen union or federation
28
c. Community Development Fund. Five percent (5%) shall be used for
projects and activities that will benefit the community where the
Cooperative operates.
d. Optional Fund, Land and Building and any other necessary fund. Five percent
(5%)shall be set aside for this purpose.
Section 2. Interest on Share Capital and Patronage Refund. The remaining net
surplus shall be made available to the members in the form of interest on
share capital not to exceed the normal rate of return on investment and
patronage refunds. Provided, that any amount remaining after the
allowable interest and the patronage refund have been deducted shall be
credited to the reserved fund. The sum allocated for patronage refund shall
be made available at the same rate to all patrons of the Cooperative in
proportion to their individual patronage, provided that:
a. In the case of a member patron with paid-up share capital
contribution, his/her proportionate amount of patronage refund shall
be paid to him/her unless he/she agrees to credit the amount to
his/her account as additional share capital contribution;
b. In the case of member patron with unpaid share capital contribution,
his/her proportionate amount of patronage refund shall be credited to
his/her account until the share capital contribution has been fully
paid;
c. In the case of non-member patron, his/her proportionate amount of
patronage refunds shall be set aside in a general fund for such patron
and shall be allocated to individual non-member patron and only
upon request and presentation of evidence of the amount of his/her
patronage. The amount so allocated shall be credited to such patron
toward payment of the minimum capital contribution for
membership. When a sum equal to this amount has accumulated at
any time within one (1) years, such patron shall be deemed and
become a member of the Cooperative if he/she so agrees or requests
and complies with the provisions of the bylaws for admission to
membership; and
29
d. If within the period specified hereof, any subscriber who has not fully
paid his/her subscribed share capital or any non-member patron
who has accumulated, the sum necessary for membership, but who
does not request nor agree to become a member or fails to comply
with the provisions of this bylaws for admission to membership, the
amount so accumulated or credited to their account together with
any part of the general fund for non-member patron shall be credited
to the Reserve Fund or to the Education And Training Fund of the
Cooperative, at the option of the Cooperative.
