Article IX
Settlement of Disputes
Section 1. Mediation and Conciliation. All inter and intra-cooperative disputes
shall be settled within the cooperative in accordance with the pertinent
Guidelines issued by the Cooperative Development Authority, Art. 137 0f
Republic Act No. 9520 and its Implementing Rules and Regulations,
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 2004 and its suppletory laws.
Section 2. Voluntary Arbitration. Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out
of or relating to this By-laws, the cooperative law and related rules,
administrative guidelines of the Cooperative Development Authority,
including disputes involving members, officers, directors, and committee
members, intra-cooperative disputes and related issues shall be
exclusively referred to and finally resolved by voluntary arbitration under
the institutional rules promulgated by the Cooperative Development
Authority, after compliance with the conciliation or mediation mechanisms
embodied in the bylaws of the Cooperative, and in such other applicable
laws
Article X
Miscellaneous
Section 1. Investment of Capital. The Cooperative may invest its capital in any
or all of the following:
30
a. Shares or debentures or securities of any secondary cooperative;
b. Any reputable bank including Cooperative Banks or any secondary
cooperative;
c. Securities issued or guaranteed by Government;
d. Real Estate primarily for the use of the Cooperative or its members; or
e. In any other manner approved by the General Assembly.
Section 2. Accounting System. The Cooperative shall keep, maintain and
preserve all its books of accounts and other financial records in
accordance with the Standards Charts of Accounts (SCA) for Cooperatives
and the Philippine Financial Reporting Framework (PFRF) for Cooperatives.
Section 3. Financial Audit, Performance Audit, and Social Audit. At least once a
year, the Board of Directors shall, in consultation with the Audit
Committee, cause the audit of the books of accounts of the Cooperative,
performance audit and social audit in accordance with the Guidelines
issued by the Cooperative Development Authority
Section 4. Annual Report. During the annual Regular Assembly meeting, the
Officers shall submit a report of the operation to the General Assembly
together with the audited financial statements, performance audit, social
audit reports and list of officers and trainings undertaken/completed. The
annual report shall be certified by the Chairperson and Manager of the
Cooperative as true and correct in all aspects to the best of their
knowledge.
The Cooperative shall submit the web-based Cooperative Annual
Progress Report (CAPR) together with the following attachments to the
Authority within (120) days from the end of every calendar year;
a. Social Audit Report;
b. Performance Report including semi-annual Mediation and
Conciliation Report;
c. Audited Financial Statement; and
d. List of officers and trainings undertaken/completed.
31
Article XI
Amendments
Section 1. Amendment of Articles of Cooperation and By-laws. Amendments to the
Articles of Cooperation and this By-Laws may be adopted by at least two-
thirds (2/3) votes of all members with voting rights, present and
constituting a quorum.
The amendment/s shall take effect upon approval by the
Cooperative Development Authority.
